# Beyond the Bitcoin-bubble I.

Bitcoin, as any other means of getting richer, is driven by greed. However, the current hype for cryptocurrencies could wind up building something that is much more important than wealth.

For the sake of argument, let's believe that the hype is legitimate, and blockchain platforms like Ethereum become a pivotal part of our digital infrastructure. How would this distributed ledger and a token economy somehow challenge one of the tech giants? One of the suggested scenarios revolve around another tech giant that has some conflicts with regulators and even public opinion: Uber. Uber is fundamentally a coordination platform between drivers and passengers. It was innovative, and there were several things in the beginning about reducing the anxiety of whether the driver was arriving in time or not, plus the map — among some of the things that we should give them a lot of credit for. But if a new service like Uber starts to take off, there’s a strong incentive for the marketplace to consolidate around one single leader creating a chain of events: more passengers are starting to use the Uber app, more drivers are attracted to the service, which in turn attracts more passengers. A lot of people have their credit cards stored with Uber; they have the app installed already; there are far more Uber drivers on the road. So, the switching costs of trying out some other rival service eventually become prohibitive, even if consumers would - because it is in their best interest - prefer a competitive marketplace with a dozen similar services. There comes a point, when the innovation around the coordination becomes less and less innovative.

The blockchain world proposes something different. Picture some group that decides there’s a case to be made for adding another “basic layer” to the stack. Just as GPS gave us a way of discovering and sharing our location, this new protocol would merely define a simple request: I am at point A and would like to go to point B. A distributed ledger might record all its users’ past trips, credit cards, favorite places — reminiscent of all the metadata that services like Uber or Amazon use to encourage lock-in. Why not call it, for the sake of argument, the transfer protocol. The standards for sending a transfer request out onto the internet would be entirely open, so, basically, anyone who wants to build an app to respond to that request would be free to do just that. Cities could build transfer apps that allowed taxi drivers to field requests, or bike-share collectives - developers could create shared marketplace apps where all the potential vehicles using transfer could compete for your business. When you walked out on the sidewalk and tried to get a ride, you wouldn’t have to place your allegiance with a single provider before hailing. You would simply announce that you were standing at point A and wanted to get to point B. And then you’d get a bunch of competing offers. You could, in theory, even get an offer from a public transportation company, which could build a service to remind transfer users that it might be much cheaper and faster just to jump on the 4:45 tram.

But how would something like the above-mentioned transfer reach critical mass when Uber already dominates the ride-sharing market? This is where the tokens come in. Early adopters of Transfer would be rewarded with Transfer tokens, which could themselves be used to purchase Transfer services or be traded on exchanges for traditional currency. As in the Bitcoin model, tokens would be handed out less open-handedly as Transfer grew increasingly popular. In the early days, a developer who built an iPhone app that uses Transfer might see some of these tokens; Uber drivers who started using Transfer as a second option for finding passengers could collect tokens as a reward for embracing the system. And, of course, daring consumers would be rewarded with tokens for using Transfer in its early days, when there are fewer drivers available compared with the existing proprietary networks like Uber.

As Transfer began to take off, it would attract speculators, no doubt, who would put a monetary price on the token and drive even more interest in the protocol by bloating its value, which, consequently, would attract more developers, drivers, and customers. If the whole system ends up working as its advocates believe, the result would be a more competitive, but, at the same time, more reasonable marketplace. Instead of all the economic value being held captive by the shareholders of one or two large corporations that dominate the market, the economic value is distributed across a much wider group, for example the early developers of Transfer, the application creators who make the protocol work in a user-friendly form, the early-adopter drivers and passengers, and, of course, the first wave of speculators. Token economies introduce a peculiar new set of elements that do not fit the currently traditional models: instead of creating value by owning something - as we can observe in the shareholder equity model – people create value by improving the underlying protocol. The do this either by helping to maintain the ledger (see: Bitcoin mining), or by writing apps based on the protocol – or, simply, by using the service. The lines between founders, investors and customers are much blurrier than in traditional corporate models. All the inducements are explicitly designed to steer away from the now popular winner-take-all outcomes. But, at the same time, the whole system depends on an initial speculative phase in which outsiders are betting on the token to rise in value.
